Speaker 1: Kia ora everyone, thank you for joining our conversation. We'll begin very shortly.
Speaker 1: Kia ora everyone, thank you for joining our conversation. We'll begin shortly.
Yep.
Speaker 2: And we're live. Kia ora everyone, and thank you for joining the conversation.
Speaker 2: Today we have your student representatives along with some university representatives to talk about the proposal to combine the faculties of law with business and economics. I'm Gabriel Boyd your AUSA president and here are your student representatives.
Kia
Speaker 1: ora everyone my name is Matthew and I'm your undergraduate education vice president.
Speaker 3: ora everyone my name is Aperfa and I'm your AULSS president representative.
Speaker 4: Hi everyone I'm Aurora I'm your co-president for AUCSA and I was a media officer for
the analysis. Kia ora everyone, my name's
Speaker 5: Brianna and I am your other co-president of AUCSA.
Speaker 2: Amazing. And now our university representatives.
Kia
Speaker 5: ora koutou, Adrian Cleland, I'm the deputy vice chancellor of operations and major strives of the U.S.N.
Speaker 6: ora koutou, I'm Joanna Brown, director of students in academic services.
So
Speaker 2: this is just a reminder that today is your chance to ask questions and hear directly from the University. Please have your say. We have the link in our link tree and also the University's website has a feedback form for any concerns or complaints you don't wish to talk about today. So up first the University is going to give a brief overview of the proposal for a couple of minutes and then our representatives will have a chance to ask questions.
Thanks
Speaker 5: Gabriel. So I'll just repeat what the proposal is from the Vice-Chancellor. So the Vice-Chancellor is seeking feedback on a proposal to combine the faculties of Business and Economics and the Faculty of Law. Within that combined faculty it is proposed that the identities of the Business School and the Law School be maintained. Within the Law School it's proposed that two departments would be created.
Speaker 5: So the law school would expand with the addition of commercial law from the Faculty of Business and Economics and would increase to over 70 academic staff and the proposal is for the law school then to be comprised of two departments. It is then further proposed that in the event it does go ahead that there would be a transition leadership established to the establishment of the combined faculty and there is some outline in the proposal around how that would occur.
Speaker 5: I think the last couple of minutes around the rationale for the proposal. So the Vice Chancellor has considered organisational effectiveness as part of the reason for the proposal. So the law, the faculty of law is now quite small compared to the other faculties in the university and there is an opportunity to tighten the academic leadership of the university at the senior level.
Speaker 5: There's also organisational effectiveness benefits opportunity around academic leadership time in law and business and economics. So we did find from the consultation in the first round of for the establishment of the Faculty of Arts and Education. That academic leadership in the small faculties was disproportionately taken up with administration and the opportunity in a broader faculty was to release time for value-add and strategic thinking and planning and leadership. There's a scale opportunity for resilience and flexibility, particularly at this time when in the university sector is under significant external pressure and change.
Speaker 5: There should be broader research opportunities for staff and students as a result of the proposal and there is an opportunity around equity on the critical mass of Māori and Pacific staff and students. So I'll stop there and happy to answer questions.
Cool,
Speaker 2: thank you Adrian. Quickly we were just in I am AUSA President Gabriel Boyd alongside undergraduate education vice president Matthew Lee. We also have your student representatives. We have APERVA representing the law faculty as well as Aurora and Bree representing the commerce faculty. On the university side we have Adrian Cleveland, the DVC operations at the university and Joanna Brown, the director of student and academic services here at the university. So again, the mics weren't working, but I encourage you to submit questions through our link, as well as give your feedback through the university's channel on their website. So now we will give the student representatives some time to respond to that opening introduction by Adrian.
Speaker 4: Thank you for your opening. I just had a question. So you said that the identities of both law school and business school will be maintained. Could you please elaborate on the specific, on the specifics on exactly how the identities will be maintained. Thank you.
Thanks
Speaker 5: Aurora. So some of those details would be pursued by the new leadership of the combined faculty. But what is envisaged is that there would be a separation within the new faculty between the business school and the law school.
Speaker 5: In some ways this is responding to requirements of our accreditation bodies.
Speaker 5: We do need to be able to provide reporting and many other aspects of the activities of the business school and the law school to our accreditation bodies and that includes the Council of Legal Education as well of course. So it would be organisationally there would be some separation there. I think too it's likely that there would be separation in terms of branding, in terms of communication, the way our website is organised because the identities are important to the university and have stood us in very good stead as both the law school and the business school are highly regarded nationally and internationally.
What about the structure
Speaker 4: of both schools because law school works very differently to every other faculty within the university just because of how a law degree is structured. So could you elaborate a little more about how the structure could potentially change
So
Speaker 5: the proposal itself sets out one option there which was to have two departments and we are receiving feedback from a number of staff within both the Faculty of Law and Faculty of Business and Economics around whether that is the best arrangement. I'm not really in a good position to say whether that's the best arrangement or not so the review committee will consider all of those pieces of feedback that come through from the academic staff around what works best. Internationally, when you look at how other law schools have been organised, there are some examples of where a law school has been organised into departments. More often, I understand, they are organised into research subjects or topics or areas, topic areas, and academic staff can align with one or more of those. So it will be interesting to see the totality of the feedback that comes through and where the review committee might get to on recommending a future structure.
Speaker 4: Awesome. And sorry, just another follow up to that. So how can students have confidence in the university's promise that the separate identities of the faculties will be meaningfully maintained when none of the details have really been worked on yet?
I
Speaker 5: think where you can have confidence is that the university is absolutely committed to triple accreditation for the business school and ongoing professional accreditation for the law school. So that requires us in many ways to have a separate identity for both of those schools and I think you can have confidence about that.
Speaker 3: Amazing, thank you. I just had a quick question on the point you made on how law school is, the law faculty is becoming one of the smallest ones, is what you'd say.
Speaker 3: Yes.
Speaker 3: What would you say, and you also mentioned that a large part of the faculty is taken up by the administrative staff.
Speaker 3: How would the absence of such staff who play a vital part in the support of law students be filled or reasoned with if there are possible cuts to those areas?
I
Speaker 5: need to clarify what I said first.
Speaker 5: just around my opening a comment. So what I was trying to communicate there was around the time spent by academic leadership, not the professional staff.
Speaker 3: So
Speaker 5: the feedback that we'd had in the proposal to create the new Faculty of Arts and Education was that in the small faculties, they still had the burden of all of that administration that a large faculty needed to undertake in terms of the Associate Dean Academic, the Regulatory, that academic leadership. And they found that with the limited amount of time they had to devote to academic leadership, it was largely being spent on administrative activities. And they were identifying an opportunity there to have more time to think strategically and to spend time on value-add activities. So that was one of the benefits that they saw.
Speaker 5: In terms of professional staff, there would be a response to any decision that is made. So in the event a proposal goes ahead for a combined faculty, at that point there would be work done on responding to that decision with respect to academic leadership or an academic leadership structure. I think for this proposed new faculty it would be quite unique because we would need to within that structure maintain the law school and the business school as well as?
Speaker 2: I think we're going to have to move into our Q&A now. I hope that gave everybody a little bit of an overview about the proposal. We're going to jump straight into the questions that you guys sent us to ask. So one of the first questions and one of the most commonly asked questions is that we all saw that the arts merger, there was a lot of contention surrounding that. How is this combination, how is this proposal different?
Speaker 2: from the arts merger?
Well,
Speaker 5: with this new combination, there are two professional faculties with accreditation, and I think that's an inherent difference. So that will need to be considered and has been considered by the Vice-Chancellor in the proposal itself in terms of maintaining those separate identities between the law school and the business and economic.
Speaker 5: Yes.
Okay,
Speaker 2: fantastic. Another question, which the answer should be relatively short, is students want to know will the names that they get on their degree, their particular accreditations, will that name differ at all? Will that change at all on their degree?
That
Speaker 5: will not change at all.
Speaker 2: That's good to know. Thank you. Okay. Did you have a... Okay. Just a green. Yeah. Following up from that, with this merger, a lot of people are concerned about the reputation and qualifications taking a hit, as well as the global standing of the law or business schools. How do we know that this won't be the case and that it'll make the degree stronger and won't hurt the qualification?
So
Speaker 5: the arrangement is not particularly unusual. So when we've had a look at a benchmarking group that we often kind of compare ourselves to, which includes the group of eight universities in Australia, so they're the highest ranked universities there, and the Russell Group universities in the UK. In the majority of those universities, it appears that the law school is part of a board of faculty. That might not be very evident to external audiences or stakeholders, and it doesn't appear to have impacted the reputation for any of those law schools.
Speaker 5: The ranking for the law school is made up from the reputation and the excellence of the research output for the academic staff at the university and that's the same as those universities in the group of eight and the Russell group. So in and of itself the proposal is not expected to have an impact on the rankings of the schools.
Speaker 1: Adrian, we've gotten a lot of questions about other universities having gone through similar proposals and actually, for example, the University of Canterbury previously merged their law and business faculties, but they had to undo that merge. We've seen other universities in New Zealand consider similar proposals and ditch that proposal, and even around the world as well. So I guess the question is, how is our proposal and our situation different?
I
Speaker 5: don't know the details of why Canterbury may or may not have done all of that, Matthew, but I can make some kind of, I have some idea that it may have been around how things were organised to ensure that accreditations were ongoing and able to be pursued. So the University of Auckland is absolutely determined to continue with triple accreditation for the business school and appropriate accreditation for the law school. And in any design decisions, that would take precedence really. So that's very important to us. And as I just said before, it's not an unusual organisation across the world. There are, of course, law schools that are completely independent in many well-ranked universities, but there are also many law schools that are completely independent in many well-ranked universities.
Speaker 5: that are well ranked, that are part of broader faculties.
So
Speaker 1: just to follow up on that, this proposal that has come through from the Vice Chancellor, the question is around how long the Vice Chancellor had to consider this proposal and I guess do research on how other universities have arranged their law and business faculties. What sort of research or even just asking around other universities has she done before submitting this proposal for consultation?
Speaker 5: for me. Happy to pass that on to her at a reasonable time.
Speaker 2: Thank you. Moving on, another major concern students have was regarding the staff of both of the schools, not just the academic staff, but the pastoral care staff, the academic support staff, and the career advice staff. So the students wanted to know, will there be staffing cuts? Do we know for sure? How do we know that this won't reshape how those different support systems work.
So
Speaker 5: I might answer the question about academic staff and around cost more generally and then I'll see Joanna can respond around the professional staff. So in and of itself this proposal would not have any impact on academic staffing in either of those faculties. So the resource allocation around academic staffing is made really around the student-staff ratios across the different areas, and that isn't impacted at all by this proposal. There would be a change in the academic governance structure, so that's around the associate dean positions, and that would be something that would be designed if it is decided to go ahead with the combined faculty.
Speaker 5: In terms of costs, and we have had queries elsewhere, and that is the real rationale for this proposal just around cost-cutting.
Speaker 5: It is not around cost-cutting.
Speaker 5: However, the University of Auckland, along with all universities in New Zealand, is facing significant financial challenge, and you'll be aware that our subsidy from government is not increased in in line with inflation. And we are also not being funded for growth, so we are only being funded at the level of domestic enrolments in 2023. They're both quite challenging decisions from government. And so we are taking a broad range of initiatives right across the university around our cost base. We absolutely need to look at our costs as well as other opportunities to improve our financial position because we are determined to remain financially sustainable.
Speaker 5: in the longer term.
Speaker 2: If we could move on to Joanna to talk about the pastoral staff as well.
Speaker 5: Thanks Gabriel.
Speaker 6: The university really recognises the importance of the pastoral care services and the career services as well, which we understand students have asked questions about. And within both the business school and the law school, they've developed a capability that actually meets the needs of our students and in line with employers and industry as well.
Speaker 6: And that's, we don't want to disrupt that benefit and that service that's been developed.
Speaker 6: And the university is constantly looking at changing at how it needs to support our students, needs to support our external communities as well.
Speaker 6: So our services never stay the same.
Speaker 6: They're always adapting and changing because of our internal and external environments.
Speaker 6: But we absolutely see the value.
Speaker 6: And we have worked alongside the faculties on the design of their services as well.
Speaker 6: So it
Speaker 2: will impact the non-academic staff, we just don't have concrete information on how?
Well,
Speaker 6: we can't say how it's going to impact into the future, but we can say that the services that they provide are critical for the support of the students. I think it's
Speaker 3: important that the university do recognise that, because that is a student concern rather than a faculty concern or academic staff concern. So in particular, though, we are getting quite a few questions from the law side of and the students have a very concrete system in place to support them pastorally, whether that be through just the academic support but also just the career support in particular as well. I did want a little bit more clarity, although I do appreciate that there isn't much right now, on whether there will be continued support.
Speaker 3: in that avenue, particular to the law degree itself, because I know the business department do have their own avenues for that, but law is a very niche and intricate and complex degree on its own. So could you just speak to that a little bit if you had conversations regarding that side of things?
Speaker 5: So taking careers to start with, for instance, we can see in the Faculty of Business and Economics and the Faculty of Law that they have both prioritised resources in this area. So they both see it as really important. I think that makes sense because they're professional schools and they have a very close relationship with the professions. So I would indicate to me because of the current priority in both faculties that when they combine they will continue to have such a priority.
Speaker 5: For Māori and Pacific students and the level of pastoral care and student support provided, I do acknowledge that in law that has certainly been a priority for them and they have prioritised resources in that area, I think have named roles to support Māori and Pacific students. I know that likewise would be a priority in the business school.
Speaker 5: And so, you know, the, I can't, in terms of a combined faculty, I can't see why they would move away from current priorities when they're looking at their future structure. You can see, though, that there are likely to be changes in that structure, and we've indicated that in the proposal document itself, because there would be changes to the way it's organised, the management structure for professional staffing. Did
Speaker 2: we have any more follow-ups about the staff, or are we ready to move to the next question? I just had one other
Speaker 4: question.
Speaker 4: So around a quarter of the students at the business school are actually international students. So would there be any changes to the support or like care that they're receiving with the combined faculty?
Speaker 5: Yes, probably a similar answer actually. But yes, the business school is very successful in attracting international students and particularly successful in taught postgraduate offerings to international students. And I think they are leading the university.
Speaker 5: in terms of the way they provide support for those students. I currently, you know, I can't see that the faculty would suddenly change direction and not want to support international students where they've been so successful in the past.
Speaker 3: Sorry, could I interrupt really quickly? And apologies if this comes off rude in any way. I just want to go back to, I guess, the rationale surrounding the proposal as a whole then. We have a lot of concerns from students about the cost-cutting rationale, which you have debunked and stated that it's not why this merger is going ahead. I personally believe there just needs to be a bit more clarity then in regards to why it's going ahead, if there's going to be a lot of changes to the professional staffing, particularly because, in my opinion, or the holistic law student opinion, we're on a very upwards trajectory in terms of building on what we've started on with our with our teaching staff, with our professional staffing, with our courier staff, and like you said, the name roles assisting specific demographics. So could you just provide a bit more clarity then as to if it's not affecting academic staff in any way, why are we merging the two faculties or proposing to at least?
So
Speaker 5: that goes back to the other rationale that the voice chances has in the proposal. So there's the organisational effectiveness objectives around having fewer and similar sized faculties at the executive level. There's the rationale around the effectiveness of academic leadership time and scale. There's the rationale around resilience particularly in this current environment where we are looking ahead to the outcome of the review of the university sector and the research sector. And that the critical mass and the scale provides in terms of having that resilience across a larger organisational unit. Just going back to the question around professional staff, I cannot say or give any guarantees that there won't be reductions in professional staff.
Speaker 5: But that is irrespective of whether there was a merger or not. Right. Because over the whole university, we are having to look at our cost structures and we are reducing the number of staff. But that is not
attached
Speaker 3: to this particular proposal. No, thank you for that. Could
Speaker 1: I follow up on that? A lot of students watching live right now feel a little frustrated that obviously it is true that the university does need to look at its costs and how we can in the face of incoming funding cuts for academia in general, we need to be cautious of how we structure our university. But I think a lot of students watching live right now have commented that they feel frustrated that this is a conversation that's happening while the university has made record profits over the past five years and significant amount of surpluses. So how is it okay that we're talking about cost-saving measures when actually the university is making surpluses.
Yes,
Speaker 5: I think you need to look under the hood a little when you're looking at some of the surpluses that we have been reporting and we've been looking at how we explain those surpluses.
Speaker 5: So there are a number of elements in the surpluses that have been reported in the last two years that relate to non-cash items.
Speaker 5: And one of those, I don't want to bore you all of this, but in terms of our lovely new building B201, we were fortunate enough to have an interest-free loan there. And because of that, accounting standards have required us to say that that is a source of revenue, the fact that we got an interest-free loan. So that is part of a very significant part, actually, of the surplus that we have been reporting. That's going to change into a cost, actually, in future years.
Speaker 5: So it's one of the interesting intricacies of our accounting standards. So if you strip away those unusual items, our actually operating surplus is not significant. In terms of the TEC, that's the Tertiary Education Commission, they are wanting the universities to achieve a 4% operating surplus, so that's the surplus to revenue. We will not be able to do that on our current forecasts for several years. And a return to that level of sustainable surplus will require us to address a significant fiscal gap.
So
Speaker 1: I think it'll be maybe important for students then, if you're able to direct us to where we can find more clarity around this information, is there anywhere we can go to read more about this?
Speaker 5: You can read the annual reports on our public website, but that's That's a good point. I mean, we're happy to provide students more information around that. We certainly have provided that to staff on the intranet. So that's a good point, actually. Happy to take that further with you, Matthew, at some point. Fantastic.
Speaker 2: Thank you. So another big question that a lot of students have was regarding the feedback and this perception that the feedback isn't being listened to or taken on board. We did a bit of homework before coming in today, and we read that the Criminal Bar Association here in New Zealand wasn't a big fan of this proposal. They came out against it alongside prominent judges who were alumni here at the University of Auckland. We had some of our faculty representatives conduct surveys and found that of those who filled out the survey, over 90% of law students stated they were strongly against this merger, as did the majority of business students. So I guess the question is, how can we guarantee that the feedback that we we have and the concerns that we have as students will be listened to in the current structure and I'm not sure how many people are aware of how it works. This proposal when it goes up to council they are advised to but don't have to listen or take any of the feedback into account when they finalize their decision. So if there's overwhelming disappointment in this proposition or disagreement or students are very bullish on a certain aspect being changed How do we know that will be listened to?
So
Speaker 5: one of the safeguards that all stakeholders have is that the Vice Chancellor has appointed a review committee with the chair being an ex-dean of the university, Professor John Hosking, and an independent party, I can't remember the name of who that is now, but on the review committee. So they will have access to all of the feedback that comes in.
Speaker 5: And we have invited members of the law profession and the business community to provide feedback directly as well.
Speaker 5: So that will be interesting for the review committee to see that.
Speaker 5: So that might mirror the feedback that you've had unofficially around the outside of the proposal, or it may not.
Speaker 5: But all of that feedback will be analysed and all will be made available to members of the review committee.
Speaker 5: My own personal experience of these sorts of proposals in the past, I have been always impressed with how review committees here have considered feedback and have worked through quite complex matters that have been raised and in general improved proposals as a result.
Speaker 5: of consultation processes.
Speaker 5: Fantastic.
Speaker 5: So hopefully that would happen again.
Speaker 3: Fingers
Speaker 7: crossed.
Speaker 7: Could
Speaker 3: I interject really quickly?
Speaker 3: I'd rather have a conversation here rather than just ask questions in a sense as well about this.
Speaker 3: Just to voice a bit of known frustration that the consultation period is over the summer break.
Speaker 3: This obviously does, was that the question that was?
Speaker 3: That was,
Speaker 2: yeah.
Speaker 3: I just would rather have a conversation about this.
Speaker 3: I guess in a sense, what were the reasons for the university's hesitance to extend the consultation period when asked to do so? And also, I guess, yeah, that's my main question. Building off of that, we can talk more. Sure.
Speaker 5: And I do acknowledge the timing of the consultation period is particularly difficult for students.
Speaker 5: The Vice-Chancellor has acknowledged that though and you can see that we've got quite an extended period of consultation. So while it is at a difficult time for students, it does allow for some coming and going and different times of being away, hopefully to enable more people to respond. From what I understand, it doesn't appear to have stopped people making...
Speaker 5: No. Submissions. No. So that's a positive sign that we're not going to be making decisions in a vacuum. So we've actually had a high degree of interest to date in the proposal. But in terms of the previous faculty rearrangement, I think the consultation process there was around three weeks for submissions, and I think this time it might be nine weeks, something like that. So we have looked to provide a longer period of time in response to that.
Speaker 2: To follow up and continue talking about the consultation process itself, I think one concern that a lot of people have is that this proposal is very general.